for the children of Gaza Israel's war
has turned schools into places of
shelter rather than learning 625,000
young Palestinians have been out of
school for more than 8 months gaza's
children make up nearly 16,000 of the
more than 37,000 people killed since
October the 7th Aid agencies say a
further three and a half thousand kids
are malnourished and on the brink of
death and an estimated 177,000 young
Palestinians have been orphaned ngos say
ber children are struggling to cope and
some of them are
suicidal joining us now on Al jazer is
ARA Damon who's the founder and
president of the NGO inara she's joining
us from Daryl Bala in central Gaza Hara
very good to have you with us on Al
jazer you're in Gaza I understand on a
humanitarian Mission with your charity
inara International Network for Aid
relief and assistance and this is your
second time there understand since the
War Began in October talk to us about
what you've witnessed during this trip
and how it uh the situation compares to
when you were there
last you know I it's exponentially more
dire more desperate if that is even
possible and what you have on top of you
know this ongoing psychological
obliteration when it comes to both the
adults and also the children is this
sort of ominous undertone and that is
this increase that you know we're seeing
but that is also being report reported
in looting in criminal activity because
what one needs to understand and this is
something that tragically happens you
know when we're talking about any sort
of War Dynamic with this level of
deprivation of the basic necessities
needed for human life and that is that
you see the the moral code beginning to
erode and so you know I I was talking to
a father yesterday who was telling me
that his 5-year-old son imagine just 5
years old coming up to him and saying
you know Daddy maybe it would have been
better if we had just died and and
stayed at home rather than having to
live like this and he was further
talking about how you know the next war
is going to happen once the bombs stop
and you hear this repeatedly over and
over again there is the war within each
individual because a lot of people will
tell you that right now despite all of
this madness all of this tragedy it's
also providing a certain level of a
distraction from the true measure the
scale the scope of everything that has
been lost and you have children that are
beginning to exhibit all sorts of signs
of severe and traumatic psychological
distress and when it comes to
specifically the humanitarian sector no
one who works within the humanitarian
sector has really been confronted you
know with with this level of need and
loss right and
and sheer and total devastation right
and I'll ask you a little bit more about
your work in in the humanitarian sector
because you're working on on setting up
medical stations and expanding the
number of shelters there in Gaza and
you're specifically focusing on children
talk to us more about the children hour
how are they coping those who have
survived this war so far how are they
doing I mean you know at this stage when
we're talking about sort of mental
health interventions for children
because the traumas are still ongoing
because the triggers are constantly
there you know the buzz of the drones is
sort of like this this ongoing taunt of
oh you think you survived but wait death
can still come when we talk about
interventions for children it very much
really focuses in the space of providing
a distraction so it's activities you
know like play like music like dancing
but then what we're also trying to do is
provide children with you know basic
educational kits but then you have you
know other things as well that that
we're trying to get into Gaza but that
have actually been been stuck for the
last 2 and 1 half months now pretty much
ever since the a border crossed and that
is things like children's shoes just
driving to this location this morning
you see children who don't have shoes
who are running around barefoot in areas
where there is sewage you have this
growing increase of you know disease and
then you have this very sort of basic
reality and that is that when a child is
scared or in pain they turn to their
parents to try to find Comfort these
very basic pillars of stability have
been fully eradicated for children so
what we try to do is build them up in
the be way possible but when you talk to
children they don't use the rhetoric the
language of children anymore they use
the language of adults and that is
extraordinarily jarring to see and to
experience and to witness and and I
imagine what's even more heartbreaking
is is seeing their parents not being
able to to bring them that comfort that
a parent usually brings to their
children uh AR you've worked in in war
zones for over two decades both as as a
journalist and a humanitarian and as a
journalist you've covered many conflicts
in Syria mosul in Iraq and and the
offensive against isol there what's been
your experience like going into Gaza and
and how is the suffering that you've
witnessed there different from some of
the other conflicts that you've covered
what makes for example the trauma of
children in Gaza different uh from what
you've seen
elsewhere you know I I was trying to put
my finger on it and one you know doesn't
like comparing one war zone to another
another person's pain you know to
another but there is something that is
markedly different about Gaza and it is
the sheer and total psychological
obliteration it's really the way that
the traumas the triggers are Relentless
there is no escaping there is no rest
fite there is no room to breathe and you
really sense this constantly it's not
you know in some of these other areas
where if you survive one bombing you're
able to move to Safe space because here
there is no concept of safe space and
then it's the sheer magnitude the scale
and the time with which it has happened
you know uh the the other day I I met a
a little girl in hospital she's 5 years
old shrapnel shredded her abdomen her
gut Spilled Out she's in hospital bed
next to her baby brother who was covered
in Burns and she's being comforted by
her aunt who is filled with such
tenderness and love towards this little
girl that it's a beautiful thing to
witness and then you realize that the
aunt is now also going to have to
fulfill the role of the mother because
these two little children's parents are
both dead they just don't know that yet
there is also another issue that is of
great and pressing and utmost urgent
concern and this is related to the
closing of the RAF border because it
wasn't just a main artery for
humanitarian assistance it was also the
only exit point and right now according
to the World Health Organization there
are 14,000 people in Gaza who need to be
medically evacuated who have emergency
medical situations they need to be able
to get out and I met one of these uh
little boys in the last 48 hours as well
if this child who also has strael injury
to the abdomen does not manage to get
out of razza he is going to either find
himself best case scenario with a
permanent disability worst case scenario
he is going to die children adults lives
are at stake not just from the bombs but
from the lack of medical access into
Gazza but also the fact that their only
evacuation Point has been blocked off as
well and which brings me to my next
question ARA the challenges what
challenges do you face operating a
humanitarian organization inside Gaza
today and why is it so difficult to move
Aid
around you know it it's impossible on so
many levels and you're constantly sort
of trying to play mental gymnastics
figuring out how to navigate the
plethora of challenges that are in front
of you and the challenges start with
first and foremost actually getting the
trucks into Gazza it is this
extraordinarily lengthy process right
now you know the only access point
especially to the South is kamam Abu
Salim and there the trucks go through
extensive screenings is excruciatingly
slow add to all of it you also have the
challenge that humanitarian
organizations don't have a say in what
actually gets to come in and so what we
end up seeing actually is Israel giving
priority to commercial trucks if you
look at the numbers right now more than
2third of trucks that have been able to
enter the southern part of Gaza mind you
in extremely low numbers but 2third of
those trucks are commercial trucks which
means that Goods end up on the market
where the vast majority of people can't
afford them once Goods have actually
manage to get through this search
process you then have the challenge of
getting them from the checkpoint to the
warehouse there is a growing uh sense of
lawlessness there is criminal activity
there are looters there are gangs you
know who are trying to Target
humanitarian uh Aid and the trucks have
to navigate this whole you know Gauntlet
of challenges just to get to the
warehouse and then there's movement
within Gazza itself north to south south
to North does not happen full stop but
then just getting the permissions to
move within Gazza it's extraordinarily
painful it's pain taking when you are
finally able you know to get something
to someone yeah to be frank you feel as
if it's so small because the need is so
great but I was talking to one of AR
inata colleagues about this yesterday
and she's like listen you know we're
we're working for our people these are
our children this is our future and even
if it's something small Even If all
we're able to offer is a smile it is
still our duty to do that ARA before we
let you go just one last question uh
right now we are at a point politically
where nothing is happening negotiations
to end the war have sold uh there
there's now fear of an all out war
between Hezbollah and
Israel what is there any hope left among
the people of Gaza that this could come
to an end
soon you know hope is a cruel beast in
the sense that one can't live without
hope but then the minute hope rises is
and then is crushed as it is every
single time there is talk of a potential
ceasefire it really sinks a person's
psyche into depths that were entirely
unimaginable you know being here you
know obviously people see that I'm a
foreigner and and you do get this
constant question of oh you know ask her
she's from the outside maybe she knows
when this is going to end and it is
gutting to not be able to answer that
because people cannot take this anymore
but at the same time there is this sense
of having to keep keep going and a lot
of Les when you talk to them you know
they don't want to be called resilient
they have been forced into this position
they don't want to be called superheroes
they have been forced to be superheroes
they are
exhausted and so is there hope that this
is going to end one day yes of course to
a certain degree but then every once in
a while you you talk to people and they
say no like it's gone it's been
eradicated we're moving forward because
you know we have children because we
don't have a choice because we have to
live and you see these these moments
where people try to create Joy they try
to create love they try to create you
know a little bit of the life that was
for each other but it's just fractions
of moments I mean the the level of
fatigue that every single person here
carries on their shoulders within their
psyche is so palpable it really hits you
it hits you in the gut and it grabs you
by the throat
ARA thank you so much for talking to us
thank you for the important work you are
doing in Gaza right now ARA Damon
founder and president of the NGO inara
joining us there from darl Bala in
central Gaza thank you very much for
your time